[THEME MUSIC]
>> The way in which one
responds to suffering,
since there is an infinite
amount and there's enough to go
around, the question of which
suffering becomes the suffering
for you.
Or at this moment,
there isn't really
a rational process involved.
You can't decide this one is
a 0.3 and that one's a 0.2.
And out of that comes, if you
trust it enough, an intuitive
yes or an intuitive no,
because you and I can't respond
to all the suffering around.
And if you're sitting
around constantly judging,
is this the worst suffering,
is this the critical suffering,
you do yourself in.
And if you think I have
to cover all sufferings,
realize you are just part
of the web of compassion.
Just like there is
a web of suffering,
there's a web of compassion.
And as you become more and
more open, and more and more
than all of it is, so
people distant aren't them.
They're still us.
It's all part of one process.
You get to the point
where you're not
sitting around judging that
you're using your time the best
way possible, because it'll
drive you up the wall.
You begin to trust your
just intuitive response
at the situation.
And you say, yes.
And now-- and you don't even
rationally necessarily know why
you say that--
when you open yourself,
it all comes towards you.
And the question is whether
or not you get overwhelmed,
or you collect it, or you
burn out, or what happens?
And actually, if you don't take
it personally, nothing happens.
It's just an impersonal process.
There's a way of
being with suffering,
and the Bhagavad Gita
has two injunctions
that I have found very useful.
One of them is,
be not identified
with being the actor.
That is, tune to the
way in which, whatever
it is coming through you,
don't get into channeling
consciousness, but just get
into the feeling of you're open
and you're listening
and you're saying,
may I serve, or may
I be an instrument?
Not my, but I will,
whichever one you want.
And then you stand to
get out of the way,
and you watch this
stuff happen around you.
That's part of it.
And the other
injunction of the Gita
is, be not attached to
the fruits of the action.
Because if you work to
bring about something,
it is natural to be attached
to whether that happens or not.
And to begin to
reorient your life,
so you realize you're doing
what you're doing because you're
doing what you're doing.
And it's aimed
towards an outcome,
but whether that outcome
will ever happen,
is not totally in your control.
And you'll do yourself in if
you spend a lot of mind time
worrying about what it will
happen rather than doing it.
And that's what the concept in
the east of doing one's Dharma
is--
you do the thing, you
listen, and out of listening,
comes response.
And then, in the
response, you're
fully in that moment
of that response.
And how it comes out
is how it comes out.
I do lots of things that fail,
but it's not doing me in.
But I realize that the
nature of the contract
is, I'm doing this as
well as I can do this.
You're doing that as
well as you can do that.
What you do with this is
your problem, not mine.
It's not my karma.
It's your karma.
If I did it as purely as I
can without the intention
of manipulation, then I don't
have the karma out of it.
I walk out empty.
And it's interesting to
see how much of your life
you're able to be
empty a moment later.
And how much you
carry stuff over.
The clinging is
where the suffering
starts inside yourself around
serving people and helping
people.
But I realize, as my
work on myself goes on,
that not letting it go
doesn't help that person,
and it doesn't help
me, and it doesn't
help the rest of the universe.
I gotta start letting
stuff go faster,
because a lot of holding on
is because you feel you didn't
do everything you
could, and you're
feeling guilty or something.
The game is to do
it as fully as you
can do it, and then, let it go.
Not cling to it.